STRANICA HOME

The Universe is all of space and time (spacetime) and its contents, which includes planets, moons, stars, galaxies,
the contents of intergalactic space and all matter and energy. While the size of the entire Universe is still
unknown, it is possible to measure the observable universe.

The earliest scientific models of the Universe were developed by ancient Greek and Indian philosophers and were
geocentric, placing Earth at the centre of the Universe.Over the centuries, more precise astronomical observations
led Nicolaus Copernicus to develop the heliocentric model with the Sun at the centre of the Solar System.
In developing the law of universal gravitation, Sir Isaac Newton built upon Copernicus's work as well as
observations by Tycho Brahe and Johannes Kepler's laws of planetary motion.
Further observational improvements led to the realization that our Solar System is located in the Milky Way galaxy,
which is one of many galaxies in the Universe. It is assumed that galaxies are distributed uniformly and
the same in all directions, meaning that the Universe has neither an edge nor a center. Discoveries in the
early 20th century have suggested that the Universe had a beginning and that it is expanding at an increasing
rate. The majority of mass in the Universe appears to exist in an unknown form called dark matter.

The Big Bang theory is the prevailing cosmological description of the development of the Universe. Under this theory, space
and time emerged together 13.799±0.021 billion years ago with a fixed amount of energy and matter that
has become less dense as the Universe has expanded. After the initial expansion, the Universe cooled, allowing
the first subatomic particles to form and then simple atoms. Giant clouds later merged through gravity to
form galaxies, stars, and everything else seen today. It is possible to see objects that are now further
away than 13.799 billion light-years because space itself has expanded. This means that objects which are
now 46 billion light years away can still be seen in their distant past, because at that time they were much
closer to us.



STRANICA CHRONOLOGY AND BIG BANG

The prevailing model for the evolution of the Universe is the Big Bang theory. The Big Bang model states that the earliest
state of the Universe was extremely hot and dense and that it subsequently expanded. The model is based on general
relativity and on simplifying assumptions such as homogeneity and isotropy of space. A version of the model with
a cosmological constant (Lambda) and cold dark matter, known as the Lambda-CDM model, is the simplest model that
provides a reasonably good account of various observations about the Universe. The Big Bang model accounts for observations
such as the correlation of distance and redshift of galaxies, the ratio of the number of hydrogen to helium atoms,
and the microwave radiation background.
The initial hot, dense state is called the Planck epoch, a brief period extending from time zero to one Planck time unit
of approximately 10−43 seconds. During the Planck epoch, all types of matter and all types of energy were concentrated
into a dense state, where gravitation is believed to have been as strong as the other fundamental forces, and all
the forces may have been unified. Since the Planck epoch, the Universe has been expanding to its present form, possibly
with a very brief period of cosmic inflation which caused the Universe to reach a much larger size in less than 10−32
seconds. After the Planck epoch and inflation came the quark, hadron, and lepton epochs. Together, these epochs encompassed
less than 10 seconds of time following the Big Bang. The observed abundance of the elements can be explained by combining
the overall expansion of space with nuclear and atomic physics. As the Universe expands, the energy density of electromagnetic
radiation decreases more quickly than does that of matter because the energy of a photon decreases with its wavelength.
As the Universe expanded and cooled, elementary particles associated stably into ever larger combinations. Thus,
in the early part of the matter-dominated era, stable protons and neutrons formed, which then formed atomic nuclei
through nuclear reactions. This process, known as Big Bang nucleosynthesis, led to the present abundances of lighter
nuclei, particularly hydrogen, deuterium, and helium. Big Bang nucleosynthesis ended about 20 minutes after the Big
Bang, when the Universe had cooled enough so that nuclear fusion could no longer occur. At this stage, matter in
the Universe was mainly a hot, dense plasma of negatively charged electrons, neutral neutrinos and positive nuclei.
This era, called the photon epoch, lasted about 380 thousand years.

Eventually, at a time known as recombination, electrons and nuclei formed stable atoms, which are transparent to most wavelengths
of radiation. With photons decoupled from matter, the Universe entered the matter-dominated era. Light from this
era could travel freely, and it can still be seen in the Universe as the cosmic microwave background (CMB). After
around 100 million years, the first stars formed; these were likely very massive, luminous, and responsible for the
reionization of the Universe. Having no elements heavier than lithium, these stars also produced the first heavy
elements through stellar nucleosynthesis. The Universe also contains a mysterious energy called dark energy, the
density of which does not change over time. After about 9.8 billion years, the Universe had expanded sufficiently
so that the density of matter was less than the density of dark energy, marking the beginning of the present dark-energy-dominated
era. In this era, the expansion of the Universe is accelerating due to dark energy.



STRANICA COSMOLOGICAL

Many cultures have stories describing the origin of the world and universe. Cultures generally regard these stories as
having some truth. There are however many differing beliefs in how these stories apply amongst those believing in
a supernatural origin, ranging from a god directly creating the Universe as it is now to a god just setting the "wheels
in motion" (for example via mechanisms such as the big bang and evolution). Ethnologists and anthropologists who
study myths have developed various classification schemes for the various themes that appear in creation stories.
For example, in one type of story, the world is born from a world egg; such stories include the Finnish epic poem
Kalevala, the Chinese story of Pangu or the Indian Brahmanda Purana. In related stories, the Universe is created
by a single entity emanating or producing something by him- or herself, as in the Tibetan Buddhism concept of Adi-Buddha,
the ancient Greek story of Gaia (Mother Earth), the Aztec goddess Coatlicue myth, the ancient Egyptian god Atum story,
and the Judeo-Christian Genesis creation narrative in which the Abrahamic God created the Universe. In another type
of story, the Universe is created from the union of male and female deities, as in the Maori story of Rangi and Papa.
In other stories, the Universe is created by crafting it from pre-existing materials, such as the corpse of a dead
god — as from Tiamat in the Babylonian epic Enuma Elish or from the giant Ymir in Norse mythology – or from chaotic
materials, as in Izanagi and Izanami in Japanese mythology. In other stories, the Universe emanates from fundamental
principles, such as Brahman and Prakrti, the creation myth of the Serers, or the yin and yang of the Tao.

The pre-Socratic Greek philosophers and Indian philosophers developed some of the earliest philosophical concepts of the
Universe. The earliest Greek philosophers noted that appearances can be deceiving, and sought to understand
the underlying reality behind the appearances. In particular, they noted the ability of matter to change forms (e.g.,
ice to water to steam) and several philosophers proposed that all the physical materials in the world are different
forms of a single primordial material, or arche. The first to do so was Thales, who proposed this material to be
water. Thales' student, Anaximander, proposed that everything came from the limitless apeiron. Anaximenes proposed
the primordial material to be air on account of its perceived attractive and repulsive qualities that cause the arche
to condense or dissociate into different forms. Anaxagoras proposed the principle of Nous (Mind), while Heraclitus
proposed fire (and spoke of logos). Empedocles proposed the elements to be earth, water, air and fire. His four-element
model became very popular. Like Pythagoras, Plato believed that all things were composed of number, with Empedocles'
elements taking the form of the Platonic solids. Democritus, and later philosophers—most notably Leucippus—proposed
that the Universe is composed of indivisible atoms moving through a void (vacuum), although Aristotle did not believe
that to be feasible because air, like water, offers resistance to motion. Air will immediately rush in to fill a
void, and moreover, without resistance, it would do so indefinitely fast.